+++
title = "The Commons: State of the Art"
description = ""
weight = 10
chapter = false
pre = "<b>2. </b>"
+++

Since the popular uprisings of the Arab Spring, *Indignados* movements
in Spain (2011) or Occupy Wall Street movement (2012), public
manifestations against inequities caused by capitalism are more and more
frequent and notorious. However, these networks of indignation
(Castells, 2012) are slowly being transformed into more proactive
movements for social change like new political parties, social movements
or solidarity economy networks which range from nutrition,
communication, education, financing, or even housing. All these
initiatives share the fact that they propose alternative systems opposed
to neoliberal capitalism and most of them are based on the same
principle: their claim for the common good in opposition to capitalist's
enclosures. It is for that reason that some of these examples are often
referred to as "urban commons".

There is a widespread notion about what "commons" are, which could be
summarised as follows: *a common is something that does not belong to
anyone yet it benefits everyone*. This notion, in turn, is associated
with positive values of sharing, solidarity or belonging to a community
and it is often used in opposition to the concept of "enclosure". This
is another concept as old as that of the commons, which is used to
describe the actions of putting fences to something and, thus, limiting
its access to a reduced number of people.

But despite this vagueness of concepts, commons are not something new,
in fact, there is also a long tradition of theorising about them which
has just recently seen a rebirth. In this chapter, we will see which are
the origins of the term, how many forms of new have been portrayed which
will lead to the next chapter in which we will outline three different
trends of understanding the commons at an abstract level.
