+++
title = "An archaeology of the commons"
description = ""
date = ""
weight = 1

+++

As stated previously, the concept of the commons is not new at all. For
instance, Christian Laval and Pierre Dardot (2014/2015, p. 30) argue
that the origins of the common date from the notions of the ancient
Greek institution of the common *(koinôn)* and "to put in common"
*(koinônein)* portrayed by Aristotle who, in turn, stated that citizens
were the ones who deliberate in common in order to decide what is best
for the city and what is fair to do (Aristotle, 4th Century
BC./2004)[^38]. Lewis Mumford (1989, p. 58) mentions the existence of
commonly managed water resources in old Mesopotamia and Peter Linebaugh
(2008, p. 40), as well as Laval and Dardot (2014/2015), state that
commonly managed resources are rooted in Christian tradition and the Old
Testament[^39]. Other authors, like Derek Wall (2014, pp. 23-31) trace
the existence of commons outside Europe or occidental culture, pointing
out that there are other historical examples in India or Mongolia.

However, despite its origins are unclear or blurred, there is a growing
number of scholars contributing to the research field of commons'
studies (figure 2.1), and today's conceptualisation on the commons seem
to agree with historian Peter Linebaugh (2008), who traced its origins
to the Magna Carta written by King John of England on 15 June 1215. Most
of them, hence, share the same imaginary when they refer to the English
commons to demonstrate that are something old and good and to outline
the parliamentary enclosure acts that put an end to most of them in
order to justify their positions. This shared imaginary, however, has
been studied from different perspectives, as we will further develop in
the upcoming pages in which we will try to define the concept of the
commons.

{{< figure src="/img/cap2/scopus-commons-evolution.png" title="Fig. 2.1. Evolution of documents containing the word “Commons” in Scopus database (1980-2016).." numbered="true" >}}


From the Spanish perspective, Nebrija's Dictionary, a Spanish dictionary
written in 1492, has an entry which explicitly defines the common[^40]
as those activities which benefit everyone (Nebrija, Colon, y Soberanas,
1492/1979, our translation.).

## 1.  Year 0: the old English Commons and Parliamentary Enclosures

There is a big core of literature pointing out that common lands
(colloquially known as "Commons") were frequent in medieval Europe.
Spain was not an exception on this[^41], although they were more
frequent and documented in pre-industrial England as the large
literature shows (Beresford, 1998; de Angelis, 2002; Fairlie, 2009;
Mingay, 1998; Neeson, 1996; Sevilla-Buitrago, 2013; Wordie, 1983). For
instance, by the year 1600, open fields represented 3/5 parts of all
arable lands and 53% of all the surface of England (Sevilla-Buitrago,
2013; Wordie, 1983, p. 491)[^42]. It was frequent that the owner of the
lands would let part of it to members of the parish councils for their
communal use, especially after the harvest and fallow. However, it would
be highly imprecise to refer to the commons as a homogeneous ethos:
Medieval commons was a phenomenon which covered a vast geography where
communication was not always easy, and a long period of approximately
four centuries that cover the slow decline of feudalism (from the end of
14<sup>th</sup> century to second half of 15<sup>th</sup>) and the birth of
industrialization in 18<sup>th</sup> century.

By taking these figures into account, we can easily deduce that there is
not one but several ways of understanding and practising the commons, as
the concept of common lands has been evolving to adapt to specific
casuistry: after all, the societies that produced them differed
substantially in time and geography. As an example, some common lands
were part of a state which belonged to a tenant and, thus, they were
tied to a manorial system[^43] regulated through Manorial Courts and
appurtenant rights. On the other hand, some others were governed by
local institutions (Parish councils) through a complex system of
customs, oral laws and moral rules in order to watch over all community
members' needs. But not only there were differences in the commons'
governances and in who their ultimate owner was, but also in the type of
commons, being the most usual the following ones: *arable fields*,
usually divided into smaller lots for rotation crops; open *pastures*
for pasturing cattle, horses, or other domestic animals; *piscaries* for
fishing; *turbaries* for taking sods of turf for fuel; or *estovers* for
taking wood (usually limited to smaller trees, bushes and fallen
branches).

Be it as it may, no matter if commons were created because of laws
(Manorialism) or customs, and despite their great variety and complexity
in their governance, they always involved two features. First, *open
access* to a land that belonged to a landlord who ceded part of it to
anyone to benefit from under certain conditions (may it be during a
specific period --fallow, pastures after harvest\...-- or to a specific
area --usually fallow lands or wastelands). And second, a
*self-organised community* that collectively managed the resources that
may grow or could be found on those lands so the higher number of people
could benefit from them without detriment to other members, usually
landless who almost had no possessions. Again, the particularities of
each community differed enormously from one to another, as each one was
independent and was organised by councils were all decisions were made
through assemblies.

Although there is no clear consensus on the reasons for why such a
particular system (often quoted to as "inefficient") endured so many
centuries, it is likely that, as pointed out by Jonas Holst (2016), it
was because commons provided a response to particular problems that
involved a sort of conjoint action to overcome them (Dahlman, 2008, p.
28). From this perspective, this particular structure benefited
landlords, as it served to keep the forests clean (preventing natural
disasters like fires or floods) and ready for production. Commoners were
also benefited, though, as the same structure provided a degree of
freedom for most of the less privileged classes in rural areas[^44], who
where able to access to natural resources for their own use that allowed
them to survive without having their own land or a proper job (Dahlman,
2008, p. 141; Neeson, 1996, p. 663; Sevilla-Buitrago, 2013; Thompson,
2009, pp. 100-101). This resulted in a life-form out of capitalist mode
of production, based on customs and social practises that allowed
commoners to "live off the land rather than on it" (Neeson, 1996, p. 66)
to the extent that, as E.P. Thompson states, "access to an extensive
common could be critical to the livelihood of many villages" (Thompson,
2009, p. 177).

However, between the end of 17<sup>th</sup> century and the beginning of 18<sup>th</sup>,
started to take place the slow decline that would eventually end with
the common lands and with the societies organised around them: the
parliamentary enclosures. These so-called parliamentary enclosures were
a set of more than 4,000 changes in the British legislation promoted by
the parliament with a common denominator: the access' limitation to the
common lands by means of fences, dykes, hedges or trenches preventing
access to them to anyone but their legal owner (Fairlie, 2009). In other
words, enclosures were a combination of privatisation plus limiting
access to those resources that had been open for centuries and provided
means of subsistence to the most deprived ones.

Although there are documented cases of enclosures during Tudor dynasty,
which were basically unilateral fencings made by landlords in order to
convert common lands into pastures (Beresford, 1998, p. 28), these
practises started to spread little by little to the point they became
institutionalised, coordinated and legislated like the aforementioned
parliamentary enclosures under Stuart and Hannover dynasties.Several
reasons led to this situation, being the most evident and documented
ones those that make a spatial lecture and see the land as a mean to
improve the economy[^45]. From that perspective, the transformation of
the open common lands into private pastures made them more efficient and
more profitable in economic terms and, as a result, England could
compete in the recently opened international market for grain
distribution, which was dominated by Poland, Prussia and The Netherlands
(Sevilla-Buitrago, 2013, sec. Implicaciones para la historiografía de la
planificación: desposesión y cambios de escala en la concepción de los
procesos territoriales) at that time.

But enclosures were far more than just a physical transformation of the
land structure and the landscape. From a social perspective, they also
provoked a profound transformation with dramatic consequences for the
millions of people (Fairlie, 2009, sec. Parliamentary enclosures) who
depended in more or less degree on the common lands but didn't own any:
the accumulation of wealth in the hands of a small elite on the one hand
and the dispossession[^46] of a vast social group on the other. By
preventing the commoners to access to the lands that brought their means
of subsistence, their lifestyle was also destroyed and all that people
were expelled from the villages where they had their previous way of
life. This situation forced commoners and former small land-owners to
initiate a rural exodus to the cities with the expectations of finding a
job opportunity in the only possible place they could be accepted with
no prior experience and where no questions were asked: a growing
industry which demanded loads of cheap labourers in order to expand and
extend their hegemony to new international markets.

Some scholars defend that, in fact, parliamentary enclosures responded
to a conscious decision to get rid of a social group that could survive
without even working and, hence, was considered as lazy, filthy and
annoying[^47]. An example of that perception on the commoners can be
found in the pamphlet written by Thomas Wilkinson in 1812, which he used
to try to convince his neighbours against the enclosure of Yanwath Moor,
in order to prevent what, according to him, would lead to a more than
probable negative consequences for the present and future of the
inhabitants of his native village, and the neighbouring ones (Wilkinson,
1812/2013, p. 2). As Sevilla-Buitrago (2013) points out, the following
fragment is worth reading, as it is an excellent document that can help
us to get an understanding of the perceptions that wealthy people had
regarding commoners and commons:

> \[...\] The fifth and last argument is the one that has been most frequently used, and is, that by inclosing (.sic) the Common we should get quit of the Potters! \[\...\]. However, as we have got hold of the poor Potters, let us keep them a little and treat them kindly, for I believe they are hitherto strangers in print. \[\...\] It is said they are a nuisance; a rat is a nuisance in a house, but what wise man would pull down his house to get quit of a rat? But they at times exhibit scenes of riot and disorder; this I lament, and would join in endeavouring to suppress such disorder. Public Houses too, exhibit scenes of riot and disorder: ale contributes to this, and has done more harm than all the Potters lodging on all the Commons in England. Yet; who would promote an act of parliament to prohibit ale? Surely nobody.
>
> Ale has done a deal of good, and Potters some. I have seen, five or ten miles from market, the Potters spread their wares on green hills, while the village maids and matrons gathered around, to become purchasers. I have not investigated the question whether these sort of purchases are made more reasonable at Penrith or by the Black Fells. The villages at the foot of that long chain of mountains, and other villages, are accommodated by these perambulating dealers, and perhaps on as reasonable terms. Then the village matron, far from market, escapes the perplexity and loss that often occur from the stumbling of her horse and the downfall of her basket, or the breakage of her crockery from the breaking of her apron-string. We see differently, and perhaps I have beheld the Potters with other eyes than some of my neighbours (Wilkinson, 1812/2013, pp. 30-31).

But from a Marxist perspective, as Sevilla-Buitrago (2012, 2013)
explains, in fact, the goal was not to destroy the commoners for the
sake of its morals but to transform them into a new social class so
dependent on their new jobs far away from their original hometowns in
order to survive, that could be easily malleable to their patrons'
needs.

Without open lands and without commoners that could manage them, almost
all the commons disappeared, not only from England but also from Europe,
where similar processes also took place[^48]. However, this process of
several centuries that brought to the almost extinction of the commons
led to a new history of rebirth. Not only some similar commons survived
throughout Europe to present days[^49], but at the end of the 20<sup>th</sup>
century they would experience a second renaissance with a renovated and
broader meaning[^50] that take this snapshot picturing the decline of
the commons as the starting point in their propositions. It is such a
critical concept in today's literature that it has been studied and
quoted by most scholars, to the point that there are very few papers
that do not mention the old English commons or the concept of the
enclosures.

[^38]: The notion of the commons has, however, evolved since then:
    Aristotle's was concerned only on the action of putting something in
    common (which was the only prerequisite) and thus, he was for
    private property if it was to be used in common, after all, as Even
    Elinor Ostrom would quote centuries later, he was aware that "what
    is common to the greatest number has the least care bestowed upon
    it. Everyone thinks chiefly of his own, hardly at all of the common
    interest" (Ostrom, 1990, sec. 1.1) and private property held in
    common could be a solution to one of the main concerns of the
    commons: that of the free-rider.

[^39]: "When you reap the harvest in your field and forget a swathe, do
    not go back to pick it up; it shall be left for the alien, the
    orphan, and the widow" (Deuteronomy, 24:19).

[^40]: The exact Spanish word used on the dictionary is *"Procomún"*
    which is often translated into English as "Commons".

[^41]: Visit 'Los comunes de villa y tierra en Guadalajara' (Herrera
    Casado, 1989) and *Los comuneros* (Pérez, 2006) for a more
    comprehensive description on how Commons were institutionalised by
    the King and their importance. Just to give an idea of their
    extension, Herrera quotes: *"La estructura socio-económica y
    político-administrativa de los Comunes de Villa y Tierra, se expande
    desde el siglo XI a través de un ancho territorio que media entre la
    orilla izquierda del río Duero y la derecha del Tajo. En ese amplio
    margen cabe entera la Extremadura castellana, la Transierra o grupo
    de tierras al sur de la Cordillera Central, y el denominado Reino de
    Toledo. Abarca también algunos fragmentos del norte del Duero por
    Soria y del sur del Tajo por las serranías conquenses. Y se expande
    en su estructura peculiar por tierras de la Extremadura leonesa, hoy
    provincia de Cáceres, y aun por las del Bajo Aragón en Zaragoza y
    Teruel o las sierras de Cazorla en torno a Ubeda y Baeza. Solamente
    en la Extremadura castellana, en la que gran parte de las tierras de
    la actual provincia de Guadalajara quedaban incluídas, existieron en
    la Baja Edad Media un total de 42 Comunes de Villa y Tierra"*.\
    Common lands are still recognized on current Spanish Constitution,
    even though their existence has been dramatically reduced due to
    several enclosure acts, such as Madoz's law in 1855, which
    expropriated most of common lands in Spain.

[^42]: Leif Jerram, however, questions this positive widespread point of
    view and provides different figures in order to argue that commons
    are not to be considered representative at all but just an idealized
    imaginary, as according to him "Common land came with labor duty to
    the landowner which was gradually commuted to a money payment. The
    class below the commoners (that is, most people) did *not* have
    right to productive common field, only limited scavenging rights on
    marginal land. The landless poor had, under the commons system,
    access to only 4% of cultivated land. The amount of land (called
    'waste') available to the genuinely poor in 1750 \[...\] was c. 1m
    acres, and was used by \>2m people" and that around 1700 "only 21%
    of the farm land in England was 'common'" and thus, common land
    farming was something exceptional which generally belonged to most
    prosperous families, "a form of bondage and privilege"
    "Significantly, around 1700 \[...\] only about 21 per cent in
    England was common land". (Jerram, 2015, pp. 57-58)

[^43]: Manorial systems, an antique system originally founded on
    feudalism, granted rights of land use to different classes through
    regulation of specific courts and appurtenant rights.
    Sevilla-Buitrago (2013) explains that, according to property
    regimes, Manors could be divided into three parts: A) demesne lands,
    controlled and used by the landlord; B) tenemental lands yielded by
    the landlord to third parties; C) waste lands like forests,
    footpaths, ponds and the like.

[^44]: This included the poor, the landless and widows amongst others,
    widows being a particularly vulnerably collective, to the point that
    were explicitly included in the Carta Magna Manifesto as to be
    protected: " At her husband's death, a widow \[...\] shall have
    meanwhile her reasonable estover in the common. There shall be
    assigned to her for her dower a third of all her husband's land
    which was his in his lifetime, unless a smaller share was given her
    at the church door." (Linebaugh, 2008, p. 284).

[^45]: It is the first time in history that urban speculation takes
    place, and it could be considered as planning for the wealthy: *"La
    acumulación y consolidación de propiedades era el modo natural de
    obtener ganancias para los terratenientes rentistas; en un contexto
    de ciclos acelerados de especulación inmobiliaria tras la revolución
    del XVII, el enclosure se convirtió en la clave para penetrar las
    tierras comunales, jugosos nichos de mercado de otra forma
    inalcanzables. Por otra parte, los objetivos del cercamiento no
    siempre tenían un carácter exclusiva y puramente económico."*
    (Sevilla-Buitrago, 2013).

[^46]: The concept of "dispossession" will become crucial in the framing
    of the commons, which will be further developed in chapter 3.3.

[^47]: At this respect, Leif Jerram states that "The reasons for ending
    commoning between 1550 and 1850 were powerful and rational, not
    arbitrary or conspiratorial» and argues that «Many commoners
    voluntarily enclosed their lands, either because it delivered an
    increase in productivity, or because they could not get on with
    other commoners" (Jerram, 2015, p. 58).

[^48]: In Spain, for example, there have been subsequent privatizations,
    like the confiscation of the communal lands in 1855 by the minister
    of finance Pascual Madoz Ibáñez. Ben White et al. introduce a
    collection of literature regarding a new set of land enclosures that
    have happened throughout history in different places of the globe,
    specially in developing countries (White, Borras Jr, Hall, Scoones,
    y Wolford, 2012).

[^49]: Visit Bravo and Moor (2008) for a comprehensive list. There are
    also some cases of commons as collectively managed natural resources
    in Spain, like the communal management of the water in the *Huertas*
    of Valencia, Murcia, Orihuela and Alicante (Ostrom, 1990, pp.
    69-81), or the "Montes vecinales de mano común" in Galicia (García
    Quiroga, 2013).

[^50]: Elisabeth Blackmar, though, argues that the concept of the
    commons has been perverted since then, and that its essence consists
    of the right that each individual possesses in order not to be
    excluded from the uses or benefits of resources (Blackmar, 2006, p.
    51).
