+++
title = "Framing the commons: A proposal"
description = ""
weight = 11
chapter = false
pre = "<b>3. </b>"
+++

In the previous chapter, we have seen how the concept of the commons has
been evolving since its origins until its revival at the end of 20^th^
century and present day's reinterpretation and resurgence. That rapid
evolution has resulted in an increasing interest and exponential growth
and development from both, the academy and the activism, giving place to
a myriad of so-called new commons. Although these new commons provide
interesting reinterpretations of almost all aspects of our lives, they
also pose significant divergences in their conceptualisation, as we have
previously discussed.

Even though the vast and diverse literature available makes evident that
these divergences are notable, we have observed three main tendencies in
the way they tackle the concept of the common. These three tendencies
conform three analytical taxonomies that, although not being completely
contradictory, differ according to where do they place their attention
focus. The first one is formed by those like Garret Hardin or Elinor
Ostrom who focus on the commons as collectively managed natural
resources and have an institutional approach. The second one is formed
by authors such as Richard M. Stallman, Lawrence Lessig and Yochai
Benkler who take an entirely different starting point: the birth of
computing software and the Internet and the new possibilities for
sharing and producing intangibles and how they are being threatened by
economic interests. And last, in the third one, there are those like
David Harvey or Antonio Negri who focus on the political and economic
consequences[^63] of enclosures of all kind and conceive the commons as
political or activist collective action with great transforming
potential.

The following sections cover in detail these three conceptions in order
to evidence how they have configured present day's notion of the commons
and, more specifically urban commons. Our position, which we will
further elaborate, is that contrarily to academia's tendency to trace a
linear genealogy of the commons, these approaches have been developed in
parallel and without almost even referencing one to another. It has not
been until recent times that they have started to converge and hybridise
more or less successfully, giving place to the still budding commons'
studies.

[^63]: Most of the studies on this second group, have focused on the
    political dimensions of such socio-economical consequences, but
    there is a growing number scholars, like Alvaro Sevilla-Buitrago,
    who study the role played by urban planning as a tool serving
    capitalism, a point of view which is present thorough this thesis
    and gives a renewed sense to urban commons as transforming elements
    not just of urban morphology but also society as a whole.
