+++
title = "The anti-capitalist approach: commons as political activism"
description = "Commons as political activism"
date = ""
weight = 3
math = false

+++

In 1994, Canada, Mexico and the United States signed the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in order to create a trilateral rules-based
trade bloc in North America, by suppressing tariffs on specific
industries like automobiles, computers, textile and agriculture (which
would be extended to all kinds of products within 15 years) as well as
protecting intellectual property rights on traded products. In order to
achieve their goals, amongst other things NAFTA suspended article 27 of
Mexico's constitution by which Indian communal landholdings were
protected from sale or privatisation. The cancellation of that
historical article, one of the foundations of Emiliano Zapata's
revolution between 1910--1919, was considered by the Zapatista Army of
National Liberation (EZLN) as a death sentence to Indian communities all
over Mexico which would accentuate the already growing social
inequalities in Chiapas, and because of that, they started a revolt and
declared war against the neoliberal Mexican government on the very same
day NAFTA came into force. So, on January 1<sup>st</sup> 1994, EZLN forces
became worldwide known when they occupied and took over seven towns
(being San Cristobal de las Casas, Las Margaritas, Altamirano and
Ocosingo the most important ones) and read their proclamation
broadcasting it to the world through the, by then brand-new, Internet.

Zapatistas' uprisings became really important not only because of their
principles (the defence of indigenous collective and individual rights;
the construction of a network of resistance against globalization and
neoliberalism; and the proposition of Politics based on the values of
democracy, freedom and justice), the results they achieved (like the
controversial San Andrés Accords[^134]) or the means they used (like the
aforementioned imaginative use of the latest technologies like the
Internet or the iconic image of Subcomandante Marcos, which contributed
in the spreading of their message worldwide): their ideology and the
poetics of their anti-capitalist discourse, based on giving the power to
the people and fighting for common lands and nature against
privatization and capitalism, turned to be setting the foundations of
anti-globalization movement, and thus transforming a local fight into a
global one. To such an extent Zapatistas' discourse turned to be a
global claim that, according to some authors like José Seoane and Emilio
Taddei (2001), the Zapatistas' uprising and the First International
Encounter for Humanity and against Neoliberalism organized by EZLN on
July 27<sup>th</sup> - August 3<sup>rd</sup> 1996 in Chiapas can be considered as the
genesis of the anti-globalization movements and other popular claims for
collectively management of natural resources like the _"Guerra del agua
en Cochabamba"_.

It is no wonder, then, that by the end of 1990s, the increasing number
of protests against globalization that took place around the world,
started to shape an anti-globalization movement which opposed to
international trade agreements and deregulated financial markets that,
according to them, provided transnational corporations with a
significant amount of unregulated power and led the least favoured
people unprotected and at their mercy. Although the germ of the activist
discourse of the commons was already inoculated, it was not until Naomi
Klein's publication in 2001 of her article *Reclaiming the commons*
motivated by the first anti-globalisation mobilisations in Seattle and
Porto Alegre Social Forum that the term "Commons" would start to be used
within this context. The introduction of the concept of the commons
provided a new paradigm for both, the anti-globalisation movement and
the commons discourse and linked their claims and enemies[^135] for good
(at least for a certain group of commons' proponents). Whereas the first
would shift from mainly being an opposition movement
(anti-globalization, anti-capitalist\...) into social-justice movement
that Naomi Klein pictured as a "movement of many movements \[...\]
against forces whose common thread is what might broadly be described as
the privatization of every aspect of life, and the transformation of
every activity and value into a commodity" (N. Klein, 2001, pp. 81-82)
which share the spirit of a "radical reclaiming of the commons" (N.
Klein, 2001, p. 82); the latter would get this picture of a past in
which everyday life was shared[^136] as the foundations of a new
imaginary of the commons threatened by a new set of enclosures[^137]
perpetrated by Neo-liberal policies in the name of Capitalism, which is
seen as the origin of all evil. Be it as it may, what both proponents
share is the need of a new global order built upon principles that are
not based on competency and profit but cooperation and sharing that
eventually replaces capitalism.

{{< figure src="/img/cap2/collage-carteles-zapatistas.jpg" title="Fig. 3.5: Several Zapatista’s signs on occupied zones displaying their political claims and ideology." numbered="true" >}}

## Capitalism, accumulation and commons

Capitalism introduced a private property-oriented perspective that
resulted in a radical paradigm shift: whereas feudalism was based on
acquiring goods in order to sell them in exchange for other goods,
capitalism changes its purpose and means, resulting in an infinite loop
based on having money in order to sell goods in order to get more money
(surplus value). According to Adam Smith (1776/2007), the origins of
this system, capable of continuously re-produce itself that destroyed
and replaced feudalism, is based on an accumulation of stock which is
prior to everything else (such as labour division)[^138]. This idea is
also shared by Karl Marx, who further developed it and named it as
"primitive accumulation", a concept that would become crucial for the
advocates of the activist conception of the commons two centuries later.

Marx, who never talked about commons but communism, devoted most of his
life to studying what he called the capitalist mode of production and,
ultimately, to the construction of an alternative to its predatory
nature: socialism (and later on, communism). According to him, and
contrary to what Smith depicted as an innocuous and peaceful process,
primitive accumulation entailed a series of violent mechanisms by which
a reduced group of people obtained wealth at the expense of a numerous
group of people through violence, enslavement, colonialism and
enclosures, amongst others. For Marx, this massive expropriation made in
the name of capitalism (in which enclosures are just a subset of that
primitive accumulation) resulted in the lowering of labourers' salaries,
impoverishment of small owners and farmers, rural exodus,
desertification of fields, breakdown between labour and property and,
ultimately, the replacement of all previous social classes by only two
possible ones: either *bourgeoisie*, (formed by those who possess the
means of production) or *proletariat* (formed by those who do not have
ownership of means of production and, thus, only possess their own
working labour force which they can sell in exchange for a salary or
wage in order to make a living). Previous social classes with privileges
like craftsmen, clergy or nobility would not exist anymore. However, far
from meaning that nobody would have privileges over somebody else (as
defended by Hegel, who conceived contracts as egalitarian tools), not
only the breach between the two classes was increased but, according to
Marx, this accumulation in favour of a higher economic efficiency, was
the origin of exploitation.

Rosa Luxemburg also shared this perspective and went further stating
that "Capitalism needs non-capitalist social strata as a market for its
surplus value, as a source of supply for its means of production and as
a reservoir of labour power for its wage system. For all these purposes,
forms of production based upon a natural economy are of no use to
capital" (Luxemburg, 1913/2003, pp. 348-349). Or in other words:
capitalism can't grow only within the capitalist sphere, as it needs to
extend outside and predate territories and social groups that are not
under its logic to continuously reproduce itself. This is also shared by
Massimo de Angelis, who stated that primitive accumulation creates the
precondition of capitalist development by separating people from their
means of production (de Angelis & Stavrides, 2010) and describes it as a
"continuous process of capitalist development that is also necessary for
the preservation of advanced forms of capitalism" (de Angelis &
Stavrides, 2010) because of two reasons: "Firstly, because capital seeks
boundless expansion, and therefore always needs new spheres and
dimensions of life to turn into commodities. Secondly, because social
conflict is at the heart of capitalist processes" (de Angelis &
Stavrides, 2010).

These conceptions about the capitalist mode of production based on
primitive accumulation and continuous expansion and exploitation (which
inevitably result in class struggles), as well as Marx's proposals for
the communism based on equality, self-management and governance[^139],
have become, centuries later, a reference for activists and scholars,
who have given new meanings to the concepts of enclosures (now opened to
any form of threat to the common good in favour of private interests)
and commons.

A clear example of this can be seen in the work of Stuart Hodkinson
(2012), who studied new types of enclosures in present time, and stated
that urban commons are the only way to confront them and palliate their
negative consequences. So, if capitalism has historically been developed
and consolidated by enclosing and privatizing the commons, following a
similar reasoning, and as Alvaro Sevilla-Buitrago (2013) pointed out
while studying the enclosures in the pre-industrial England and their
relation to capitalism, there are a number of new autonomists and
anti-capitalist movements which propose to invert the dynamics by
collectively re-appropriating and recovering spaces, resources and forms
of life. Almost as an exercise of reverse engineering, and as pointed
out by Laval and Dardot, the term "common" is now used to "translate
fights, practises, rights and new forms of resistance opposed to
privatization process and commercialization that have escalated since
1980" (Laval & Dardot, 2014/2015, p. 109, our translation).

Another scholar who has recently drawn attention to the commons
phenomenon as a way to confront capitalism is David Harvey, who had
previously translated the idea of primitive accumulation into the urban
context and evolved the concept into what he called "accumulation by
dispossession"[^140] which creates a new social class: the dispossessed.
According to him, the revival of the rhetoric of the commons gets an
added significance in a moment in which state-supplied goods have
declined or have just become a mere vehicle for private accumulation. As
he argues:

> \[Commons\] are not a particular kind of thing, asset or even social
> process, but as an unstable and malleable social relation between a
> particular self-defined social group and those aspects of its actually
> existing or yet-to-be-created social and/or physical environment deemed
> crucial to its life and livelihood (Harvey, 2012, p. 73).

He also states that the relationship between social groups and those
aspects or resources has to be collective and non-market oriented
(excluding exchange or profit-oriented logics). As admitted by him,
there is a porous difference between public goods and commons within
this conception, to the point that public goods can (and often do) turn
into commons: "While these public spaces and public goods contribute
mightily to the qualities of the commons, it takes political action on
the part of citizens and the people to appropriate them or to make them
so" (Harvey, 2012, p. 73). As examples of those public goods that have
turned into commons, Harvey mentions public education ("when social
forces appropriate, protect, and enhance it for mutual benefit"
--Harvey, 2012, p. 73), Syntagma Square in Athens, Tahrir Square in
Cairo, Plaça de Catalunya in Barcelona (which "became an urban commons
as people assembled there to express their political views and make
demands" --Harvey, 2012, p. 73) and streets ("a public space that has
historically often been transformed by social action into the common of
revolutionary movement, as well as into a site of bloody suppression"
--Harvey, 2012, p. 73). For this reason, Harvey states that the
neoliberal policies result in less public investment, which in turn
results in the dramatic reduction of the available commons.
Consequently, if the State withdraws from the provision of public goods,
the only possible answer is that populations self-organize in order to
produce their own commons, which leads to the following conclusion: "The
political recognition that the commons can be produced, protected, and
used for social benefit becomes a framework for resisting capitalist
power and rethinking the politics of an anti-capitalist transition"
(Harvey, 2012, pp. 86-87).

## The biopolitics of the commons

Two other influential scholars who have updated Marx's ideas to present
times about the commons are Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, who focus
their discourse on the commons into the social production sphere[^141].
According to them, Marx's theories need to be revisited and given a new
approach, as the industry has lost its once hegemonic role in
capitalism, not just because fewer people work in factories but also
because the industry no longer imposes quality over other sectors of the
economy (Hardt, 2010, p. 348). Hardt and Negri claim, then, that in the
contemporary configuration of capitalism, the current hegemonic form of
production is biopolitical and immaterial[^142], through the production
of a coherent and recognisable set of ideas, affects, knowledges, codes
and social relations. This new type of immaterial production is not
characteristic of the factories but of the service sector and is being
imposed to all levels of the economy, from the highest end to the
lowest, and to society as a whole (Hardt, 2010, p. 349). This, in turn,
has profound implications in the division of labour[^143] and ultimately
leads to another of their fundamental premises: throughout the last part
of 20<sup>th</sup> century, such production of affects and social relationships
has been slowly replacing the sovereignty of nation-states by a new form
of transnational biopolitical capitalism that they call "imperial
sovereignty," or *Empire* which they develop in the homonym book (Hardt
& Negri, 2000).

This conception depicts a globalised scenario in which neoliberal
policies are applied to all the society's facets to, as stated by Laval
and Dardot (2014/2015, p. 154), provide financial capital with bargain
assets for the dominant classes, in which dispossession is just a piece
of the whole picture. According to the same authors, the ultimate goal
of neoliberalism is not to dispossess certain groups from any of their
goods, rights or identity, but to transform all social relations and,
hence, the relationship between humans and assets by systematically
subduing social reproduction in all their dimensions (wages, families,
politics, culture, subjectivity...) to capital's extended reproduction
(Laval & Dardot, 2014/2015, p. 154). However, as Hardt and Negri argue,
this also results in the creation of a common world in which we all live
in, for good or bad, and which leaves no space for other alternatives,
just because there is no possible outside, as it has filled everything:

> It seems to us, in fact, that today we participate in a more radical and
> profound commonality than has ever been experienced in the history of
> capitalism. The fact is that we participate in a productive world made
> up of communication and social networks, interactive services, and
> common languages. Our economic and social reality is defined less by the
> material objects that are made and consumed than by co-produced services
> and relationships. Producing increasingly means constructing cooperation
> and communicative commonalities (Hardt & Negri, 2000, pp. 301-302).

This new panorama does not invalidate Marx's premises, nor does negate
the action of capitalism nor the existence of manual labour and working
class, but points out a single shared logic that applies to all social
sectors which ultimately introduces a new type of struggle, not related
to material property (either immobile property --such as land-- or
movable --such as material commodities) like in Marx's time, but related
to immaterial property. Since this new type of property is not tied to
the logics of scarcity and is easier to share and reproduce, it is more
difficult to control its ownership. Not only that, it is in its nature
to be shared and to become part of the realm of the common, as the more
it is shared, the more valuable they become (ideas, codes, languages or
knowledges, in fact only make sense when they are shared). And here
comes the paradox and one of the central ideas of Hardt and Negri's
discourse: it is within the creation of this immaterial and biopolitical
common world created by capitalist expansion where lies the end of it,
as by expanding beyond the production of material assets, capitalist is
encouraging the creation of the commons which will, eventually, overcome
it. Or, in Hardt's own words:

> Now we are in position to understand the point of recognizing the
> proximity between the idea of communism and contemporary capitalist
> production. It is not that capitalist development is creating communism
> or that biopolitical production immediately or directly brings
> liberation. Instead, through the increasing centrality of the common in
> capitalist production --the production of ideas, affects, social
> relations, and forms of life-- are emerging the conditions and weapons
> for a communist project. Capital, in other words, is creating its own
> gravediggers (Hardt, 2010, p. 355).

In this context, Hardt and Negri describe the city and the metropolis as
the new factories of the common which, as Harvey (2012, p. 67) outlines,
become entry points of anti-capitalist critique and political activism.
Hardt and Negri, hence, advocate for a democracy of the multitude
pursuing a commonwealth based on the fact that we all share and
participate in the common (in singular). They understand the common as a
combination of two types: 1) *the products of the nature* (like the air,
the water, the fruits of the soil, fisheries and so on[^144]) and; 2)
*the results of social production* (like knowledges, languages, codes,
information, affects, and so forth) (Hardt & Negri, 2009, p. viii). As
they both state, contrary to the environmental approach that we have
developed in chapter 3.1, this notion of the common "does not position
humanity separate from nature, as either its exploiter or its custodian,
but focuses rather on the practices of interaction, care, and
cohabitation in a common world, promoting the beneficial and limiting
the detrimental forms of the common" (Hardt & Negri, 2009, p. viii).
They argue that this dual dimension and emphasis on the social
interaction practices is key in the era of globalization, as "issues of
the maintenance, production, and distribution of the common in both
these senses and in both ecological and socioeconomic frameworks become
increasingly central" (Hardt & Negri, 2009, p. viii).

According to this new dimension of the common, and as we have previously
developed, it is clear that they are present in almost all spheres of
social life. However, as Hardt and Negri warn, contrary to this logical
conclusion, the general perception is that the common is something rare,
even it may be surrounding us. Neoliberal policies aimed to privatize
the common in their most diverse forms in order to turn it into private
property are to blame, but also the widespread and yet biased public
opinion that the only possible alternative to the private is the public,
or put into political terms, between capitalism and socialism: either
private property regulated by the market or public property regulated
through State policies[^145]. This dichotomy clearly ignores the common
as something irrelevant or as it never existed. "It is often assumed
that the only cure for the ills of capitalist society is public
regulation and Keynesian and/or socialist economic management; and,
conversely, socialist maladies are presumed to be treatable only by
private property and capitalist control. Socialism and capitalism,
however, even though they have at times been mingled together and at
others occasioned bitter conflicts, are both regimes of property that
exclude the common" (Hardt & Negri, 2009, p. ix).

So, when Hardt and Negri advocate for instituting the common, they are
referring to a political but also ethical project that poses a third way
that is neither public nor private, neither socialist nor capitalist
and. Their political philosophy "substitutes older categories like, 'the
people' and 'the state', or 'private' and 'public', with new ones like
'multitude' and 'commonwealth' or 'singularity' and 'common'" (Martin,
2013) and, as a result, opens a new space for politics[^146]. It is for
this reason that, as quoted by Laval and Dardot, Commonwealth "provided
the first theory of the common, which had the historical merit of moving
the reflection from the plane of specific experiences on the commons (in
plural) to a more abstract and politically ambitious conception of the
common (in singular)" (Laval & Dardot, 2014/2015, p. 22, our
translation), which due to its ambiguity[^147] is yet to be explored and
developed.

[^134]: One of their most celebrated achievements was the agreements
    reached with the Mexican government which resulted in the signing of
    San Andrés Accords in 1996, which granted autonomy, recognition, and
    rights to the indigenous population of Mexico and the preservation
    of the natural resources within the lands occupied by the indigenous
    population. However, at present day, and despite several
    modifications on the Mexican constitution regarding that matter, the
    spirit of the accord has not yet been translated into specific laws,
    although Chiapas' Governor recently positioned himself for that
    matter (Tuxtla Gutiérrez, 2015).

[^135]: Being the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, along with
    transnational corporations, the most quoted ones.

[^136]: Something that according to Historian Leif Jerram (2015, p. 55)
    is a false premise, as he considers that it actually never happened.

[^137]: We have already warned that the concept of "enclosures" has also
    been miss-used as a synonym of "privatization", which according to
    Hodkinson are just a part of the enclosure itself, along with
    "dispossession" and "capitalist subjectification" (Hodkinson, 2012,
    p. 515).

[^138]: "\[...\] when the division of labour has once been thoroughly
    introduced, the produce of a man's own labour can supply but a very
    small part of his occasional wants. The far greater part of them are
    supplied by the produce of other men's labour, which he purchases
    with the produce \[\...\]. But this purchase cannot be made till
    such time as the produce of his own labour has not only been
    completed, but sold. A stock of goods of different kinds, therefore,
    must be stored up somewhere sufficient to maintain him, and to
    supply him with the materials and tools of his work till such time,
    at least, as both these events can be brought about. \[\...\] This
    accumulation must, evidently, be previous to his applying his
    industry for so long a time to such a peculiar business. As the
    accumulation of stock must, in the nature of things, be previous to
    the division of labour, so labour can be more and more subdivided in
    proportion only as stock is previously more and more accumulated"
    (Smith, 1776/2007 chap. Introduction).

[^139]: As Lenin (1918/2009, chap. 3) pointed out, the events that took
    place in the Paris Commune in 1871 marked a turning point in Marx's
    though and their governance model as well as its organization and
    claims served as an important inspiration for his communist project.
    Although he had previously stated in his 1848's edition of the
    Communist Manifesto that the bourgeois State should be overcome by
    the Proletariat State which would eventually dissolve until its
    complete dissolution due to the lack of social classes, he had never
    explained how this transition from one State to another should take
    place. It was not after the Paris Commune that he started to have a
    clearer project and, thus, he made a prologue updating his original
    version (Marx & Engels, 1848/2001).

[^140]: Regarding this matter, Laval and Dardot pointed out the
    relationship between accumulation by disposession and the increasing
    number of new types of enclosures: "La desposesión no es un tipo de
    acumulación original superada históricamente, es una forma
    permanente de acumulación de capital que, en la época del
    capitalismo financiero, tiende a convertirse en el modo dominante y
    explica la nueva 'explosión de cercamientos'" (Laval & Dardot,
    2014/2015, p. 146).

[^141]: According to Laval and Dardot (2014/2015, p. 233) this
    apparently original conception that Hardt and Negri make about the
    commons as a result of immaterial labour has been influenced by
    Proudhon, to the point that they develop a comparison of both
    thoughts in several of their pages (233-243).

[^142]: Laval and Dardot call this new type of production as "cognitive
    capitalism", the production of which is not industrial but
    immaterial and, hence, is no longer produced in factories but as a
    result of cooperation between brains (Laval and Dardot, *Común*,
    226).

[^143]: For a deeper explanation about immaterial and biopolitical
    production and their implications of divisions of gender and
    geographical labour, visit Hardt and Negri (2009, chap. 3).

[^144]: There is an exact match of this type of commons with Elinor
    Ostrom's conception of the commons as Common Pool Resources
    developed in chapter 3.1, although for Hardt and Negri are just a
    part of a broader spectrum of commons.

[^145]: As we have seen in chapter 3.1, this debate is not exclusive
    from this conception of the common, as Elinor Ostrom also got to the
    same conclusion, despite her conception of the common is completely
    different and her methodology, too.

[^146]: According to Aras Özgün (2010, p. 377): "By formulating the
    communist project around 'common' as such, as a 'collective
    productive resource' that is not 'property' (neither 'private' nor
    'public'), Hardt's project breaks away from past interpellations of
    communism which prioritized the determination of a vanguard
    socialist state/public".

[^147]: Harvey acknowledges that despite Hardt and Negri's discourse may
    be as suggestive as Lefebvre's right to the city, it is as ambiguous
    and slippery as the latter: "Like the right to the city, the idea
    sounds catchy and intriguing, but what could it possibly mean?"
    (Harvey, 2012, p. 67).
