+++
title = "The digital approach: commons as peer produced intangibles"
description = "Commons as peer produced intangibles"
date = ""
weight = 2
math = false

+++

At the end of 20<sup>th</sup> century, a series of profound technological
(Software, ICT\...) and social changes have led to the transformation of
society into what has been framed as the *network society* (Castells,
2001/2003, 2006b, 2010) and where knowledge plays a central role. In
addition to this new *informationalist paradigm* (Castells, 2002,
2006a), the crisis suffered by democratic institutionalization (like
government, education, health\...) have favoured new social practises
which in turn have resulted in new forms of production, distribution and
consumption of information, but also in legal changes (being some of
them controversial[^75]) and, ultimately, new threads to social justice
and, thus, new claims against them. Two of the most notorious movements
in this context are *Free Software Movement* and *Free Culture
Movement*, best exemplified by GNU/Linux for the former and by Creative
Commons and collaborative sites like Wikipedia and Open Street Map for
the latter. Both movements are in turn rooted into the ethics of the
*Hacker movement* that was born around the Artificial Intelligence Lab
from MIT around 1950, which was not ruled by economic interests but by
the pleasant, educational and fun benefits of creating and sharing
knowledge collectively (Himanen, 2001/2002).

The following chapters cover the birth and evolution of these
contemporary examples, as theorised by Richard Stallman and Lawrence
Lessig and later divulged by Yochai Benkler, and how after having
gathered momentum (especially within --but not limited to-- non-academic
environments), they have provided the ideological, technical and legal
foundations that ultimately have profoundly influenced the concept of
digital commons.

## Software: Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS) and Free Software Movement

Software was born free[^76]: during 1950 and 1960s, software was mostly
developed by researchers from universities and academia, where the
culture of sharing and peer review had been long established.
Consequently, and maybe unconsciously, software adopted that scientific
approach and was distributed at no cost and usually accompanied by the
source code, should the end user (almost always another researcher) need
to make any changes to make it work on their hardware or in case new
features were to be added. At that time software distribution was also
tied to hardware distribution: software was not seen as something
valuable on its own but as a tool to operate a device, just like any
other component. As it was seen as a part of a whole (like a screen, a
circuit board or a protecting box) only the hardware what was worth to
be paid, as it was the whole. Or in other words: the cost of the
software was included in the cost of the hardware, for hardware and
software were seen as a bundle.

However, as computer science evolved, complexity also increased, and the
ecosystem started to change[^77]. As a result, software development
turned to be something considerably harder and slower, which, in turn,
made the previous business model inefficient: not only hardware
manufacturers had to increase the price of their products due to the
software complexity, but they started to fail in meeting their final
users' requests (for example, leased machines started to require
software support, which was out of the scope of hardware manufacturers
as it provided no revenue to them). But the final blow that would split
hardware and software for good came from the courts: on January 17<sup>th</sup>,
1969 the *United States vs. IBM* antitrust suit was filed with the
resolution that bundled software was anti-competitive (Fisher, McKie, &
Mancke, 1983; Lopatka, 2000). That resolution consolidated the already
growing software industry and although some software was still
distributed for free (like UNIX, the most used Operating System at that
time --although they slowly changed their policy till their business
model shifted completely), most of them were sold under restrictive
licences that only allowed final users to make use of their software.
Software became a product, and as such, it had to be paid for and had to
be protected by copyright laws and by technological means[^78].
Privative (or proprietary) software was born.

This scenario stayed more or less stable until 1985, when Richard
Stallman, who was an engineer at MIT[^79] by that time, published the
GNU Manifesto[^80], a seminal document which would open a new way of
conceiving software development and would continue with the birth of GNU
Project, GNU Licences and, ultimately, to *Free Software movement*. The
manifesto started explaining what GNU was (a new UNIX-like Operating
System that could run UNIX software and which anyone could contribute to
and distribute it for free, yet at the same time no one would be able to
appropriate it and prevent it from being free); what its current status
was (several people had contributed to it and several development tools
--such as his famous Emacs-- had already been developed or were due to),
and making an open call to developers to get involved in the project and
contribute to it. The second part of the manifesto is addressed to
explain GNU's benefits to virtually anyone, as he makes distinction
between developers/contributors, who may be able to write better code
and at the same time redistribute their creations for free, and
end-users as a whole, who may be able to use the best possible software
without having to be put into an ethical dilemma. But most of the
document is addressed to refute possible arguments against it. In his
last part, Stallman writes answers to such possible argumentations, most
of them addressing the problem of how software developers would be able
to make a living with Free Software. Although he claims that most people
would still develop without any monetary incentive[^81], according to
him, there is no problem in developers earning money nor even trying to
make a living out of it. However, he states that they would earn less
money, as most of it came from licences that restrict copying, something
he considers that makes no sense at all[^82], and that for that reason
they should look for new diverse and innovative ways to earn money (he
provides a number of options, such as porting existing software to GNU
or to specific hardware, teaching, hand-holding and maintenance
services, donations from satisfied users\...).

Later that year, on October 4<sup>th</sup> 1985, Stallman founded the Free
Software Foundation (FSF), a non-profit organisation aimed to secure
freedom for computer users by promoting the development and use of free
software and documentation[^83], and as a way to sponsor free software's
flagship: GNU project. However, the first formal definition of free
software, which is still valid today, had to wait till next year: as it
was published by Richard Stallman on behalf of the Free Software
Foundation in February 1986 (Stallman, 1986). According to FSF, software
can be considered as free if people who receive a copy of it have the
following four freedoms (GNU, 1996):

-   **Freedom 0:** The freedom to [run] the program for any
    purpose.

-   **Freedom 1:** The freedom to [study] how the program
    works, and [change] it to make it do what you wish.

-   **Freedom 2:** The freedom to [redistribute] copies so
    you can help your neighbour.

-   **Freedom 3:** The freedom to [improve] the program, and
    release your improvements (and modified versions in general) to the
    public, so that the whole community benefits.

Two main conclusions can be outlined out of this definition: The first
one is that despite accessing the source code (not just binary files) is
not considered a freedom by itself, it is needed in order to satisfy
freedoms \#1 and \#3, otherwise studying and modifying software without
it can range from highly impractical to nearly impossible. The second
one is that the term "free" has nothing to do with price but with
*liberty*: anyone should be free to do what they please with the
software, even selling it[^84]. The fact that the term "free" has two
meanings in English has brought a lot of confusion which Stallman has
often had to refute with his famous quote "To understand the concept,
you should think of 'free' as in 'free speech' not as in 'free beer'"
(GNU, 1996).

However, this idealistic vision had to survive in a hostile environment
ruled by copyright regimes. In fact, that was one of Stallman's main
concerns[^85]: to assure that free software would always be free, no
matter what, or in other words, to prevent anyone from appropriating it
in their own benefits and as general public's detriment[^86]. For that
reason, in 1989 Richard Stallman published the first version of their
GNU General Public License (GPL)[^87], which was used by all the
programs released as part of the GNU project. Its preamble was clear
enough in this matter, as it stated that:

> The license agreements of most software companies try to keep users at
> the mercy of those companies. By contrast, our General Public License is
> intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
> software\--to make sure the software is free for all its users. The
> General Public License applies to the Free Software Foundation\'s
> software and to any other program whose authors commit to using it. You
> can use it for your programs, too. (Free Software Foundation, 1989 chap.
> Preamble).

In order to accomplish those statements, GPL licence offered several
mechanisms, being the most outstanding ones the fact that anyone who
used a software licensed under GPL should release it along with the
licence and the source code (Free Software Foundation, 1989 secs. 1-3);
that anyone could use the software for any purpose (Free Software
Foundation, 1989 sec. 2); or the fact that the distribution of any
modification made to a GPL-licensed software should preserve the same
licence and thus shared under the same free terms as the original one
(Free Software Foundation, 1989 sec. 6). These actions make a clear
distinction between intellectual property and ownership: although the
software authors are credited for their authorship, they do not have
exclusive control over it, as with proprietary software. As a result,
since only some rights are preserved (opposed to the well known "all
rights reserved" statement in traditional copyrights), GPL is considered
to be the first precursor of Copyleft movement, which will be further
developed in next section. Consequently, Free Software addresses an
ethical problem as well as a practical one.

However, and no matter how highly-skilled was Stallman in writing code
(he had already written many lines of code of broadly used software), he
was aware that it would be really challenging, if not impossible, to
write a complete operating system on his own, without which Free
Software's spread and usage would only be anecdotal. It is for that
reason that, with all the previously mentioned initiatives, Stallman
consciously initiated a snowballing movement into which anyone could fit
in and contribute to. And actually that is what really happened.

### From "Free Software" to "Open Source Software" and "FLOSS"

By 1990, GNU had managed to create everything needed to have a complete
operating system but a viable kernel[^88] (the part of any operating
system that communicates between applications and the actual hardware).
However, in the same year, a Finnish student at the University of
Helsinki called Linus Torvalds started a personal project in order to
develop the most basic part of an Operating System, its kernel (which he
would name as *Linux*). He announced its first prototype publicly in a
Minix (a Unix-like system intended for academic use) developers'
newsgroup as a way of surveying the most common needs and invited others
to join him. In order to do so, and probably influenced by Stallman's
work[^89], he also published its source code, first under its own
licence, which had a restriction on commercial activity, and two years
later adopted GNU GLP License. Despite Torvald's initial claim that
Linux would never be something "big and professional like GNU"
(Torvalds, 1991), what started as a personal project contained in a few
files of 10,000 lines of code, grew rapidly, turning into a with more
than 18 million lines of source code[^90] developed by thousands of
contributors[^91] which today is used in every domain, from embedded
systems to supercomputers, and have secured a place in server
installations often using the popular LAMP application stack or mobile
devices running Android, while the number of distributions for end users
is also growing.

One of the keys of this success can be found in the perfect ecosystem
formed by the GNU project, which provided the legal and technological
framework needed for such an endeavour. As a result, Linux became the
missing piece that was necessary to have a completely free development
environment, and for first time in history it was possible to have a
computer which only used Free Software. Unfortunately, despite all the
tools that were required to achieve that, did in fact exist, it was not
easy to find them all and put them together, and in order to make things
easier GNU/Linux[^92] distributions were created, which were complete
packages ready to use, even for end users.

{{< figure src="/img/part1/59416-linuxdistrotimeline-7.5.svg" title="Fig. 3.2: A GNU/Linux Distros timeline until 2007. Source: Aleksandar Urosevic (GPL)" numbered="true" >}}

Paradoxically, despite these two pieces of the puzzle fit perfectly, the
tandem formed by GNU and Linux is, in fact, a marriage of convenience:
whereas GNU has a strong political and ethical component (to the point
that its vision may be dogmatic), Linux lacks any form of political or
ideological discourse, as its motivations were just pragmatical, not
political[^93]. In other words, there is no revolution behind Linux
other than a technological one, similar to that performed by Henry
Ford's on the production lines[^94]. A new way of producing software
based on a bottom-up approach consisting of a distributed network of
self-managed volunteers doing plenty of small incremental changes was
born.

It is no wonder that such goodness attracted not just volunteer
developers, but also companies, some of which decided to adopt it for
their own software. However, as more developers and firms that adopted
the so-called Bazaar production model (Raymond, 2001), more people
started to feel uncomfortable with the "Free Software" term, as it
carried some political connotations and produced irrational rejection in
corporate environments (mostly because it could easily be associated
with not getting money out of it)[^95]. One of these persons with more
concerns and a pragmatical view was Eric Raymond (1998), who made an
open call to the community to start using the term "open source"
instead. With this new term, he wanted to describe the new and more
efficient mode of organisation and software production without carrying
any political connotation. Later that year Raymond and Bruce Perens
founded the Open Source Initiative and provided the first definition
derived from the Debian Free Software Guidelines with some notable
differences with the one for Free Software[^96].

This new term was rapidly adopted by influential people like Torvalds or
publisher Tim O'Reilly but also had to face stiff opposition like
Stallman himself, who considered Free Software as something entirely
different and, in fact as a subset of Open Source Software[^97]. As a
result, it started a schism between the free software movement and the
communities of open source software developers. The main difference
between these two groups is the relationship between open source and
proprietary software, as Free Software defenders reject any form of
proprietary software, whereas Open Source proponents accept it, as they
consider it is something good that big companies like Microsoft or
Google may make efforts to support open source software to remain
competitive.

Several naming have been proposed to address this conflict, and
currently the most accepted and widespread one is the term *"Free/Libre
and Open Source Software"* (or FLOSS), which was proposed in 2001 by
Rishab Aiyer Ghosh in order to avoid taking sides in the debate between
"free software" and "open-source software", as using it does not
necessarily take part in choosing between the two camps.

Paradoxically enough, despite these differences and controversies and
despite none of their most prominent authors have ever talked about
FLOSS as a Commons, it has highly influenced the way we now understand
the Commons and Free culture, to the point that authors like Yochai
Benkler consider it as "the quintessential of commons-based per
production" (Benkler, 2006, p. 63) as it "\[Free Software\] has played a
critical role in the recognition of peer production, because software is
a functional good with measurable qualities" (Benkler, 2006, p. 64).

### FLOSS as a social justice movement

Despite the unquestionable growth in computer systems, devices users and
developers experienced in the last 20 years has favoured the growth of
FLOSS' supporters, its discourse has gone beyond engineers, hackers,
Free Software advocates or savvy users. One of the reasons for this
expansion is the one provided by John L. Sullivan[^98], who argues that
FLOSS[^99] has to be considered as a social movement that has expanded
to include broader aims of digital freedom and social justice and
started as a rebellion against authoritarian control (a vision which,
non-surprisingly, is shared with early hackers) and the belief that a
new form of computer freedom advocacy was required. However, Sullivan
goes even further claiming that FLOSS movement should be, in fact,
considered a social justice movement, as he claims that "Social justice
issues have been at the core of the free software movement ever since
Stallman crafted the notion of the communitarian ethos that prevents
many software projects from being removed from the public domain by
introducing public restrictions" (Sullivan, 2011, p. 232). Not only
that, according to him, GPL licenses created a new legal alternative to
copyright which "provided the rudiments of a rival liberal legal
vocabulary of freedom, which hackers would eventually appropriate and
transform to include a more specific language of free speech" (Coleman,
2009, p. 424). It is, precisely, this "freedom discourse" which has also
highly influenced other social justice movements which despite are not
directly related to Free Software "have adopted much of Stallman's
rhetoric as a tool to advance their own social justice aims, thereby
broadening the ideological reach of the F/OSS movement to incorporate
issues of consumer sovereignty, digital rights and information commons"
(Sullivan, 2011, p. 232), and thus, transcended Free Software claims
with "larger philosophical issues of free speech and democratic
information access" (Sullivan, 2011, p. 237).

## Knowledge: Free Culture Movement

One of the social justice movements' subsets that have adopted the
aforementioned "freedom discourse" as one of its key concerns is the
Free Culture Movement (FCM), a social movement that pursues the freedom
to distribute, reproduce and modify cultural, artistic and creative
works as free content[^100]. So, if Stallman has often expressed his
concerns against the impossibility to share a software with someone who
needs it just because of legal issues[^101], free culture advocates have
extended that demand by arguing not only that it would be improper to
refuse to share any type of information for the same reasons, but
claiming that the more information is shared, the better, since any
cultural production should be considered as a common good and, thus, as
a gift to humanity which is to be shared.

As a social movement, FCM has some clear goals, such as promoting
participative knowledge and their aim to propose a new production model
based on digital commons (Fuster Morell & Subirats, 2015, p. 39) and
reform intellectual property regime; and have clearly identified a set
of opponents (Diani & Bison, 2004, p. 282), such as political
institutions which regulate against their goals and corporations and
lobbies that promote monopolistic practices. Additionally, FCM should be
considered as a distributed movement of movements that share some sets
of values and principles (Fuster Morell & Subirats, 2015, p. 40), which
may include Copyleft[^102], Open Knowledge, Libre Knowledge or Open Data
movements.

Most of those FCM core principles and values where announced in Lawrence
Lessig's seminal book from 2004: *Free Culture: How Big Media Uses
Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity*,
where he claims not only that copyright is an obstacle to cultural
production, knowledge sharing and technological innovation, but that are
private interests, and not public good, what determine those copyright
laws[^103]. Lessig, a lawyer and activist specialised in computer law
and intellectual rights[^104], states that the birth of the Internet has
introduced profound and unnoticed changes in the way culture is being
produced and shared that are threatening to negatively transform a
tradition of cultural production. According to him, the fact that
Internet's architecture makes it really easy, fast and cost less to copy
and modify content (Lessig, 2004, pp. 276-277), not only offers
excellent possibilities for new ways of cultural production[^105], but
would also make it easier than ever to create derivative works. As a
consequence of this ease of creating derivative works, cultural
production would experience exponential growth, both qualitative and
quantitative. After all, cultural production seldom starts from scratch
but is often based on other authors' works, either improving the
original work or simply by mixing elements in an original way[^106].
However, and despite this "traditional" (Lessig, 2004, p. xv) way of
cultural production has been accepted and celebrated for years[^107],
recent regulatory changes have completely shifted in the opposite
direction, enacting laws that fiercely protect all types of property
rights. These regulatory changes favour not author's but the private
interests of an industry based on the distribution and of their
copyright and distribution which has seen its business model seriously
threatened after the arrival of the Internet and the possibilities of a
more efficient regime. This situation, hence, has been treated as an
exception and accepted as an unshakable truth, whereas it would have
been unacceptable in other contexts[^108].

According to Lessig, this is an erroneous approach, as not only does not
create a debate in order to provide a more comprehensive notion of
property and piracy, two fundamental concepts of digital culture[^109],
but biases any possible debate by narrowing the options to only two and
excluding ones: "either property or anarchy, either total control or
artists won't be paid" (Lessig, 2004, p. 276). The fallacy of this false
dichotomy is that it omits any situation between those extremes, either
copyright (all rights reserved) or public domain (no rights reserved).
As a result of this biased proceeding, Lessig argues that not only the
new creativity possibilities offered by the Internet are going to be
unexploited, but a series of freedoms that previously were taken for
granted (such as the right to privacy, the right to share and modify
software or the right to have an open access for academic
publications[^110]) are about to be lost[^111].

But despite Lessig exposed most of FCM's key points, and despite his
influence on FCM can't be denied, it is also true that he didn't provide
any formal definition for Free Culture or anything that can resemble the
four freedoms that every program should guarantee to be considered as
Free Software. On the contrary, "Freedom" is only mentioned in the
context that creators should be able to decide how do they want their
works to be distributed, so under these terms, Lessig's notion of
freedom, is reduced to a matter of choice, decision or autonomy.

It is no wonder, then, that the notion of "Free Culture" is a
controversial one, as its meaning is something dynamic and diffuse that
FCM's proponents adapt and reuse according to their point of view[^112].
For these reasons there have been several attempts at providing a
univocal definition, like the collaborative approach at
freedomdefined.org aimed to provide clarity on the FCM to better explain
their goals and make communications with copyright holders more
effective. In order to do so, they started a collaborative document
which was originally based on the existing philosophies of free software
and open source, on the existing policies of relevant projects like
Wikipedia, and on their "strong moral conviction that as many works as
reasonably possible should be available to all human beings, as freely
as possible" (Freedom defined, 2016). As a result, they reached a
"stable" definition[^113]. According to their stable definition, a work
or content is to be considered free if it is released under a licence
granting the following freedoms without limitation:

> -   **The freedom to use and perform the work:** The licensee must be
>     > allowed to make any use, private or public, of the work. \[\...\]
>
> -   **The freedom to study the work and apply the information:** The
>     > licensee must be allowed to examine the work and to use the
>     > knowledge gained from the work in any way.\[\...\]
>
> -   **The freedom to redistribute copies:** Copies may be sold, swapped
>     > or given away for free, as part of a larger work, a collection, or
>     > independently, with no limitations on the amount of information
>     > that can be copied, on who can copy the information or on where
>     > the information can be copied. \[\...\]
>
> -   **The freedom to distribute derivative works:** In order to give
>     > everyone the ability to improve upon a work, the license must not
>     > limit the freedom to distribute a modified version (or, for
>     > physical works, a work somehow derived from the original),
>     > regardless of the intent and purpose of such modifications.
>     > However, some restrictions may be applied to protect these
>     > essential freedoms or the attribution of authors \[...\]. (Freedom
>     > defined, 2015)

It is important to note that what makes a work free is the ability for a
person to legally and practically exercise their fundamental freedoms in
relation to a work. As a result, using a free licence is just a
necessary yet not sufficient condition, as it only provides a legal
frame. However, a technical framework is required too in order to
practically exercise the aforementioned freedoms. So, from a technical
perspective, a work has to fulfil the following additional conditions
(Freedom defined, 2015):

-   **Availability of source data:** Where a final work has been
    > obtained through the compilation or processing of a source file or
    > multiple source files, all underlying source data should be
    > available alongside the work itself under the same conditions.
    > This can be the score of a musical composition, the models used in
    > a 3D scene, the data of a scientific publication, the source code
    > of a computer application, or any other such information.

-   **Use of a free format:** For digital files, the format in which the
    > work is made available should not be protected by patents, unless
    > a world-wide, unlimited and irrevocable royalty-free grant is
    > given to make use of the patented technology. While non-free
    > formats may sometimes be used for practical reasons, a free format
    > copy *must* be available for the work to be considered free.

-   **No technical restrictions:** The work must be available in a form
    > where no technical measures are used to limit the freedoms
    > enumerated above.

-   **No other restrictions or limitations:** The work itself must not
    > be covered by legal restrictions (patents, contracts, etc.) or
    > limitations (such as privacy rights) which would impede the
    > freedoms enumerated above. A work may make use of existing legal
    > exemptions to copyright (in order to cite copyrighted works),
    > though only the portions of it which are unambiguously free
    > constitute a free work.

A different, and yet similar, approach to provide a definition is the
one initially developed by the non-profit Open Knowledge, with
substantial input from other interested parties and initially derived
from the Open Source Definition. According to them, an open work must
satisfy the following requirements in its distribution (Open Knowledge,
2015):

1.  **Open License or Status:** The work must be in the public domain or
    provided under an open license \[...\].

2.  **Access:** The work must be provided as a whole and at no more than
    a reasonable one-time reproduction cost, and should be downloadable
    via the Internet without charge. Any additional information
    necessary for license compliance (such as names of contributors
    required for compliance with attribution requirements) must also
    accompany the work.

3.  **Machine Readability:** The work must be provided in a form readily
    processable by a computer and where the individual elements of the
    work can be easily accessed and modified.

4.  **Open Format:** The work must be provided in an open format. An
    open format is one which places no restrictions, monetary or
    otherwise, upon its use and can be fully processed with at least one
    free/libre/open-source software tool.

And in order to accomplish condition \#1, they define which conditions
should a licence fulfil to be considered an Open License, some of them
are mandatory whereas others are just optional (Open Knowledge, 2015):

1.  **Required Permissions:** The license must irrevocably permit (or
    allow) the following:

    1.  **Use:** The license must allow free use of the licensed work.

    2.  **Redistribution:** The license must allow redistribution of the
        licensed work, including sale, whether on its own or as part of
        a collection made from works from different sources.

    3.  **Modification:** The license must allow the creation of
        derivatives of the licensed work and allow the distribution of
        such derivatives under the same terms of the original licensed
        work.

    4.  **Separation:** The license must allow any part of the work to
        be freely used, distributed, or modified separately from any
        other part of the work or from any collection of works in which
        it was initially distributed. All parties who receive any
        distribution of any part of a work within the terms of the
        original license should have the same rights as those that are
        granted in conjunction with the original work.

    5.  **Compilation:** The license must allow the licensed work to be
        distributed along with other distinct works without placing
        restrictions on these other works.

    6.  **Non-discrimination:** The license must not discriminate
        against any person or group.

    7.  **Propagation:** The rights attached to the work must apply to
        all to whom it is redistributed without the need to agree to any
        additional legal terms.

    8.  **Application to Any Purpose:** The license must allow use,
        redistribution, modification, and compilation for any purpose.
        The license must not restrict anyone from making use of the work
        in a specific field of endeavour.

    9.  **No Charge:** The license must not impose any fee arrangement,
        royalty, or other compensation or monetary remuneration as part
        of its conditions.

2.  **Acceptable Conditions:** The license must not limit, make
    uncertain, or otherwise diminish the permissions required in Section
    2.1 except by the following allowable conditions:

    10. **Attribution:** The license may require distributions of the
        work to include attribution of contributors, rights holders,
        sponsors, and creators as long as any such prescriptions are not
        onerous.

    11. **Integrity:** The license may require that modified versions of
        a licensed work carry a different name or version number from
        the original work or otherwise indicate what changes have been
        made.

    12. **Share-alike:** The license may require distributions of the
        work to remain under the same license or a similar license.

    13. **Notice:** The license may require retention of copyright
        notices and identification of the license.

    14. **Source:** The license may require that anyone distributing the
        work provide recipients with access to the preferred form for
        making modifications.

    15. **Technical Restriction Prohibition:** The license may require
        that distributions of the work remain free of any technical
        measures that would restrict the exercise of otherwise allowed
        rights.

    16. **Non-aggression:** The license may require modifiers to grant
        the public additional permissions (for example, patent licenses)
        as required for exercising the rights allowed by the license.
        The license may also condition permissions on not aggressing
        against licensees concerning exercising any allowed right
        (again, for example, patent litigation).

Despite the proposals from Freedomdefined and Open Knowledge for a "Free
work" definition have different perspectives on the conditions that a
work has to fulfil in order to be considered as free, they share the
main key points: the need for establishing specific legal and technical
requirements to consider a work to be free, where open licences and open
formats play a crucial role. Although there were a number of free
licences used by the Free Software Movement, like the aforementioned GPL
or Affero, MIT License, BSD... it made little or no sense at all to
mention things like compiled or source code, binary files... within a
context of cultural creation. And it is precisely for that reason that
new types of licences were developed for those specific needs, like the
most used one today: Creative Commons.

### Creative Commons

Creative Commons is Lawrence Lessig's proposal on what can be done in
order to rebuild the freedom to create, share and access to culture
without compromising new forms of expression and communication and, at
the same time, is a non-profit organisation supporting Free Culture
Movement. Motivated by what he considers an excessive concentration of
power[^114], Lessig (2004, p. xv, 131, 161-168) defends an intermediate
position regarding intellectual property rights: a "sensible copyright"
(Lessig, 2004, p. 277) that neither reserves all rights to the copyright
holder preventing others from making any type of use with the work,
neither allowing third parties to do what they please with a work in
detriment to their authors' interests. For this reason, inspired by
Stallman's work, he founded in 2001, along with Hal Abelson (MIT
Professor), James Boyle and Eric Salzman (lawyers specialized in
cyber-law and intellectual property) and Eric Eldred (online editor),
Creative Commons, a non-profit organization devoted to promote "the
sharing and use of creativity and knowledge" (Creative Commons; Fuster
Morell & Subirats, 2015, p. 31) through free legal and technological
tools, which currently is the most visible one behind FCM.

The main representation of these legal tools consists of a set of open
licences named "CC licenses" with a broader notion of intellectual
property rights which reserve only some rights for their authors,
without compromising their own interests (See table 3.1 below). So,
instead of having a single licence like GPL that has to fit in for any
purpose, Creative Commons provides six different type of licences[^115]
that authors can pick from, according to their needs. This flexibility
makes CC licenses appropriate for most types of content that are to be
shared publicly (mostly -but not restricted to- publications, music,
images or videos, but not software or hardware[^116]).

|          | Copyright  | Creative commons  | Public Domain / Fair use  |
|----------|------------|-------------------|---------------------------|
| Scope    | Set by default  | Voluntary: Chosen by creators  |  Expired copyrights |
| Rights   | All Rights reserved  | Some rights reserved\*  | No rights reserved  |
| Freedoms | Recognition/None | <ul><li>Recognition</li><li>Copy\*</li><li>Redistribution\*</li><li>Modification\* </li><li>Commercial\*</li></ul>   | <ul><li>Copy</li><li>Redistribution</li><li>Modification</li><li>Commercial</li></ul>  |
| *\*: according to creators' desires*  |   |   |   |

<center>_Tabl. 3.1: Property regimes comparison matrix_</center>

The way authors can decide which rights they want to reserve is by
picking one or several of the following four conditions:

1.  **Attribution:** the right to be credited for the work.

2.  **Non Commercial:** the right to prevent or allow third parties to
    make profit out of the work.

3.  **No Derivative Works:** the right to prevent or allow third parties
    to alter the work in any way.

4.  **Share alike:** the right to entail third parties to release any
    derivative work under the same original licence.

As a result of the combination of those parameters, the following six
different type of licences can be obtained, ordered from most to least
open:

1.  **Public domain:** despite in strict sense, it is not a CCLicence,
    it has often been named as the CC0, as authors can voluntarily opt
    not to reserve any right about their works. Authors do not have any
    right over their work, and anyone can do anything with it, without
    any conditions applicable.

2.  **Attribution (CC BY):** This licence allows anyone to do anything
    (distribute, remix, tweak, and build upon) with the work as long as
    they credit the original author(s).

3.  **Attribution -- Share-alike (CC BY-SA):** This licence allows
    anyone to do anything (distribute, remix, tweak, and build upon)
    with the work even for commercial purposes, as long as they credit
    the original author(s) and licence their new creations under the
    identical terms.[^117]

4.  **Attribution -- No derivative (CC BY-ND):** This licence allows
    anyone to redistribute (commercially and non-commercially), as long
    as it is passed along unchanged and in whole, and they credit their
    original author(s).

5.  **Attribution -- NonCommercial (CC BY-NC):** This licence allows
    others to do anything with a work (remix, tweak, and build upon)
    non-commercially. Although their new works must also acknowledge the
    original authors and be non-commercial, they don't have to license
    their derivative works on the same terms.

6.  **Attribution -- NonCommercial -- Share-alike (CC BY-NC-SA):** This
    licence allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon a work
    non-commercially, as long as they credit original authors and
    licence their new creations under the identical terms.

7.  **Attribution -- NonCommercial -- NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND):** This
    licence is the most restrictive of all CC Licences, only allowing
    others to distribute works as long as they credit their original
    authors, although it is not possible to change them in any way or
    use them commercially.

This flexibility introduced by these six CC Licenses, (which is in fact
aligned with Lessig's conception of "freedom", which seems to be reduced
a mere question of choice) by providing a wide spectrum of freedoms
regarding creative works is one of the main difference between other
Free licences. However, this flexibility introduces a degree of
complexity that may make it difficult to chose from. For this reason,
Creative Commons developed a tool called 'CC License chooser'[^118] and
a series of guidelines which aim to help creators to pick the licence
that best fits their needs. However, it is important to note that only
CC-BY and CC BY-SA licences (in addition to public domain) can be
considered as strict "Free licences" in terms of they grant the freedoms
that where described at the end of the previous section, whereas the
rest of licenses fail on that matter (Figure3.3).

{{< figure src="/img/part1/CC-LICENCES.png" title="Fig. 3.3: Licences ordered from most to least open. Source: CCM." numbered="true" >}}

Another significant difference between CC Licenses and other types of
free licences, is what they call "Three-layer" design, which means that
every CC License is, in fact a combination of three different layers: A
legal code, an easy to read version of that code, and machine readable
code. The first layer of CC Licenses is the legal text which is the only
layer that has a legal validity. However, as the language used in this
text (like in most legal documents) can be daunting for many creators
and people in general who may not be familiar with legal vocabulary,
each of these licences are accompanied by a short description called
"Legal deed" and a recognizable logo, which conform the second layer.
Its goal is to twofold: on the one hand they work as a tag which makes
it easy to recognize any document using a CC License, and on the other
hand it as provides a brief and easy to understand explanation of what
can be done and cannot be done with it and refers to the legal
document[^119]. The third layer of a CC License it is aimed at
computers. Aware of the importance played by the Internet in terms of
distributing and creating derivative works, they provide a "machine
readable" version of the license, which is, in fact, a summary of the
essential freedoms and obligations written into a standardised
format[^120] that software systems, search engines, and other kinds of
technology can understand. By adding this code, it is easy to find any
type of content available on the Internet that makes use of a CC
License, either using regular search engines or Creative Commons'
specific search engine[^121].

In summary, Creative Commons redefine and construct new legal meanings
to the notions of (free) creative works and intellectual property rights
by providing an alternative more sophisticated copyright system based on
Stallman's GPL simple, standardized way to give the public permission to
share and use author\'s creative work, but at the same time respecting
the conditions chosen by authors themselves. In fact, using the hacker
terminology, CC Licenses are a fork of GPL which hack copyright regimes
and, thus, challenge the existing intellectual property licences by
crafting new freedom discourses.

## Common-based peer production

If, as we have just seen, Stallman's vision has enormously contributed
to shaping the FCM by serving as inspiration regarding proceedings and
establishing legal frameworks, Torvalds' has also influenced it in the
way of how culture and knowledge can be produced. One of the most
prominent scholars that has studied that concept is the Law professor
Yochai Benkler[^122], who named it as "Common-based peer production".

In 2006, with FLOSS living a high acceptance and expansion and Wikipedia
celebrating its 5<sup>th</sup> anniversary, Benkler published his seminal book
*The Wealth of Networks* (Benkler, 2006) in which he studied the changes
suffered in the production and exchange of information, knowledge and
culture within the networked society, which according to him are deep
and structural[^123]. Most specifically, Benkler elaborates a discourse
based on three pillars, *technology*, *social relations*[^124] and
*market and freedom*[^125]*,* and how do they allow forms of altruistic
collaboration between peers (the so-called "common-peer based
production") and their potential transforming consequences for the
emergence of the "networked information economy" and its implications
for society, politics, and culture.

According to him, and based on a series of economic observations made in
the first part of the book, we are facing a new economic paradigm which
he calls the "networked information economy" which is characterised by
decentralised individual action motivated by reasons other than the
economic reward (non-market oriented). This economic paradigm has been
made possible due to technological improvements[^126], especially those
related to communication and storage of information and ICT, which are
now available to most of the population in developed countries and
provide new opportunities for exchanging information, knowledge and
culture: the so-called Common-based peer production. This central idea
is heavily interlinked with the notion of the commons. However,
Benkler's approach has nothing to do with natural resources, sociology
or politics (as the ones that have been developed in section 3.1 and
will be developed in 3.3, respectively), but with technology and
economy. According to him, the existence of Free/Libre Open Source
software or sites like Wikipedia evidence the existence of a new form of
production which is "radically decentralized, collaborative, and
nonproprietary"[^127]. Another important feature of this new way of
producing is that those network of individuals who cooperate with each
other to commonly produce something are seldom motivated by future
rewards or profit[^128]. In other words: they are not market oriented in
terms that they do not rely on market signals or managerial commands or
hierarchies.

This particular subset of peer production shares some features with
Elinor Ostrom's framing of the commons, such as the notions of
self-managed cooperative networks of individuals and the fact that "no
single person has exclusive control over the use and disposition of any
particular resource" (Benkler, 2006, p. 61). For Benkler, a commons
"refers to a particular institutional form of structuring the rights to
access, use, and control resources. It is the opposite of 'property' in
the following sense: With property, law determines one particular person
who has the authority to decide how the resource will be used. That
person may sell it, or give it away, more or less as he or she pleases"
(Benkler, 2006, p. 60). Or in other words, he understands the commons as
open access, and as a result, the aforementioned examples of FLOSS and
Wikipedia should be considered as a common. This broad definition of the
Commons contrasts with the one provided by Ostrom, as instead of
focusing on collective action governance as she did, Benkler considers
as a really defining feature of the commons the access conditions to the
goods. Far from being contradictory, this generic definition allows
Benkler to include digital commons, which due to its non-rival nature
could not comfortably fit on Ostrom's approach.

However, some may find this definition as too narrow. Since it does not
consider how collective action takes place, it does not make
distinctions between services like Wikipedia and Flickr, software like
Android and Firefox, or GNU/Linux distributions like Debian[^129] and
Ubuntu... According to Benkler's definition, all of them are to be
considered as commons despite the fact that some of them are clearly
nonmarket oriented (as they are governed by non-profit foundations like
Wikimedia, Mozilla or GNU or community of people who share the goals and
ideals of the project), whereas others (Flickr, Android or Ubuntu) are
driven by big companies like Yahoo!, Google or Canonical respectively
and thus ultimately respond to commercial interests[^130] even though
they admittedly have a strong collaborative component in which people
participate unselfishly.

As Mayo Fuster (2015, p. 26) lucidly points out, this lack of
distinction has prevented Benkler to foresee that, opposed to 2006
context, the open source and digital commons' panorama has changed
dramatically and, 9 years after the writing of *The Wealth of Networks*,
big global corporations like Google, Facebook or Amazon have adopted
part of the collaborative discourse into their business models and the
majority of the most famous and used forms of digital peer production
are now led by companies instead of being community-driven[^131]. Not
only that, peer production has extended to new spheres like open
hardware and digital fabrication, mapping services, crowd-funding\...
and ultimately to the business sphere, with new players like Uber or
AirB&B[^132] that perfectly illustrate the controversial so-called
"sharing economy". However, far from invalidating *The Wealth of
Networks* discourse, this new scenario brings a new dimension to it and
is still valid as a starting point. In fact, Benkler himself has updated
his position in future publications by including these new examples of
peer production and making a distinction between "common-based peer
production" and "corporate-based peer production" (Benkler, 2013).

After explaining what this new way of (socially) producing is, as well
as the economics that is behind that concept[^133], Benkler claims that
common-based peer production explicitly questions the incumbents of the
industrial information economy and at the same time creates new
opportunities in most areas of people's lives:

> These changes have increased the role of nonmarket and nonproprietary
> production \[\...\]. These newly emerging practices have seen remarkable
> success in areas as diverse as software development and investigative
> reporting, avant-garde video and multiplayer online games. Together,
> they hint at the emergence of a new information environment, one in
> which individuals are free to take a more active role than was possible
> in the industrial information economy of the twentieth century. This new
> freedom holds great practical promise: as a dimension of **individual
> freedom; as a platform for better democratic participation**; as a
> medium to foster a more critical and self-reflective culture; and, in an
> increasingly information-dependent global economy, as a mechanism to
> achieve improvements in human development everywhere. The rise of
> greater scope for individual and cooperative nonmarket production of
> information and culture, however, threatens the incumbents of the
> industrial information economy. (Benkler, 2006, p. 2, emphasis added).

It is in his last part of the book, *Policies of Freedom at a Moment of
Transformation*, where Benkler focuses on the political implications of
this new paradigm based on collaboration and freedom and how this can
create new forms of collective action that may transform the upcoming
political agenda and public policies. According to him, "it is the
technological shock, combined with the economic sustainability of the
emerging social practices, that creates the new set of social and
political opportunities that are the subject of this book" (Benkler,
2006, p. 34), and the field of politics and social action is an example
of it.

{{< figure src="/img/part1/panoramica-acampada-sol.jpg" title="Fig. 3.4 15M movement in Madrid’s Puerta del Sol. Credits: La información" numbered="true" >}}


Again, time has proved Benkler right, as since 2006, there have been
many examples of massive collective and self-managed mobilizations and
protests for political reasons, such as Arab Spring that started in 2010
in Tunisia and spread to neighbour countries like Egypt, Libya and Yemen
and ended forcing off of their respective rulers; "Indignados" Movement
that started on May 15<sup>th</sup> 2011 and concentrated thousands of people in
the main public squares of 58 cities in Spain during several weeks in a
row protesting against political corruption and austerity measures; or
Occupy Wall Street movement.


[^75]: In Spain, Sociedad General de Autores (SGAE) has pushed hard to
    approve several laws like the Digital Canon (which was finally
    abolished on December 31^st^ 2011), known as "Ley Sinde" Ley de
    Economía Sostenible (2011) or Ley de Propiedad Intelectual (2014)
    (which ultimately made companies like Google to close their News'
    service with a controversial release note
    -[[https://support.google.com/news/answer/6140047?hl=es]](https://support.google.com/news/answer/6140047?hl=es)).
    There are also examples of similar experiences worldwide, like the
    controversial Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA), a United States bill
    introduced to expand the ability of U.S. law enforcement to combat
    online copyright infringement and online trafficking in counterfeit
    goods.

[^76]: Free not only in terms of open-access but also in the terms that
    Richard Stallman would define Free Software 30 years later.

[^77]: Two were the main reasons for such change at the end of 1960's:
    the growth of hardware catalogue, now more complex, and the
    widespread of language compilers that made easier to write code but
    made binary files impossible to read or modify, only execution was
    possible.

[^78]: The most used technique was to distribute only the binary files,
    which only allow to run the software, tied to a restrictive licence
    known as EULA or TOS.

[^79]: Notably enough, MIT was the same place where, at the beginning of
    1960, a group of developers called themselves "hackers" and believed
    that information should be open to anyone and that access to
    computers should be unlimited as well. For more information about
    hackers, visit Himanen (2001/2002) and Levy (2001).

[^80]: GNU Manifesto (Stallman, 1985/1993) was finally published in 1985
    based on Richard Stallman's announcement text from 1983. Through
    1987, it was updated in minor ways to account for developments;
    since then, it seems best to leave it unchanged, although starting
    in 1993 several footnotes have been added to clarify several
    concepts, although the essence has been unchanged. The latest
    up-to-date version can be found on GNU's website:
    [[http://www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.html]](http://www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.html)

[^81]: Stallman stated that "Programming has an irresistible fascination
    for some people, usually the people who are best at it", a position
    is also shared by Pekka Himanen, who further develops the reasons on
    the hackers' ethics (Himanen, 2001/2002), Eric S. Raymond, who
    appeals to passion as the main motivation for hackers (Raymond,
    2001) and even Linus Torvalds, who suggested that there are only
    three main motivations to make a person do something: "survival",
    "social life" or "entertainment" (Torvalds, 2001).

[^82]: Stallman argues that "Control over the use of one\'s ideas really
    constitutes control over other people\'s lives; and it is usually
    used to make their lives more difficult." and "People who have
    studied the issue of intellectual property rights carefully (such as
    lawyers) say that there is no intrinsic right to intellectual
    property. The kinds of supposed intellectual property rights that
    the government recognizes were created by specific acts of
    legislation for specific purposes." (Stallman, 1985/1993).

[^83]: Currently, as well as serving as a legal and economical backup
    for Free Software, it has also promoted campaigns against threats to
    computer user freedom like Digital Restrictions Management (DRM) and
    software patents, such as Defective by design or Open Document
    campaign. For a comprehensive list of campaigns carried out by the
    Free Software Foundation visit
    [[https://www.fsf.org/campaigns/]](https://www.fsf.org/campaigns/)

[^84]: In fact, Stallman was one of the first to earn money from Free
    Software, as during the first years of GNU Project, he used to sell
    copies and send them by postal mail.

[^85]: As it has been pointed out in the previous chapter (3.1 The
    institutional approach: commons as collectively managed resources),
    this concern was also shared by Hardin (1968) and would be later be
    of utmost importance in Elinor Ostrom's framing of the Commons.

[^86]: In fact, Stallman himself had suffered from that bad experience,
    when a private company, Symbolics Inc., hadn't allowed him to see
    the improvements they had made to a Lisp interpreter that Stallman
    had been developing for years and had released it as public domain
    (Williams, 2002/2010 chap. 7).

[^87]: There have been two subsequent modifications, GPL v.2 (1991) and
    GPL v.3 (2007), which is the up-to-date version.

[^88]: Although it is true that GNU already had its own kernel, called
    Hurd, it performed poorly and it wasn't mature enough (in fact, at
    the time of writing it hasn't reached a level of stability that
    makes it useful in production environments).

[^89]: In his now famous short message (Torvalds, 1991), he quotes GNU:
    "*I\'m doing a (free) operating system (just a hobby, won\'t be big
    and professional like gnu) for 386(486) AT clones.",* and in fact he
    used GNU C Compiler to compile Linux.

[^90]: At the time of writing (Version 4.2.3, released in 2015)

[^91]: Even though just about two percent of the current Linux kernel
    has actually been written by Torvalds himself (The Linux Information
    Project, 2006), he is one of the largest contributions to it. These
    figures give an idea of how complex it is and how many contributors
    have been involved in Linux.

[^92]: There has been some controversy on how to call the tandem formed
    by the kernel (Linux) and operating system (GNU), but the correct
    term to be used is GNU/Linux (Stallman, 2014). Stallman argues that
    not using GNU in the name of the operating system unfairly
    disparages the value of the GNU project and harms the sustainability
    of the Free Software movement by breaking the link between the
    software and the free software philosophy of the GNU project.

[^93]: In fact, Linus Torvalds has publicly rejected any political
    motivation with statements like "It's not that you do open-source
    because it is somehow morally the right thing to do. It's because it
    allows you to do a better job. I find people who think open-source
    is anti-capitalism to be kind of naive and slightly stupid." (Vance,
    2015).

[^94]: One of the first persons to reflect on this new mode of
    production was the hacker activist Eric S. Raymond, who, in 1997,
    named it the Bazaar development model, in opposition to the
    conventional and centralized development model (which he named
    "Cathedral model") followed by most software up to that date
    (Raymond, 2001). Yockai Benckler would later acknowledge its
    importance based on voluntary contributions and ubiquitous,
    recursive sharing, questioned previous assumptions on the way things
    are produced (Benkler, 2006, pp. 65-66).

[^95]: As John L. Sullivan points out quoting the work of Dedrick and
    West when analysing the Free/Open Source Movement as a social
    movement, "'the movement ideology' of access to the source code and
    more choice for users was found among the true believers of the free
    software \[...\] but not among organizational adopters, who
    expressed more pragmatic goals" (Sullivan, 2011, p. 227).

[^96]: Since it is out of scope of this research to make a thorough
    explanation of this definition nor to make a comparison with the
    previous one, we refer to Open Source Initiative (2007).

[^97]: However, the FSF admits that "the differences in extension of the
    category are small: nearly all free software is open source, and
    nearly all open source software is free."
    ([[https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/categories.html]](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/categories.html))

[^98]: In his article, Sullivan (2011) explains FLOSS from the
    perspective of the four stages that frame any social movement
    defined by Elliott and Kraemer (Elliott, 2008, pp. 359-380): 1)
    social unrest; 2) popular excitement; 3) formalization; and 4)
    institutionalization.

[^99]: Throughout his essay, Sullivan always uses the terms "F/OSS" or
    "Free Open Source Software", although for the sake of clarity and
    for the reasons aforementioned we will be using the term FLOSS as it
    is currently more accepted and precise.

[^100]: According to Sullivan (2011, p. 233), "Stallman's emphasis on
    reinvigorating a sense of common good via artistic and other
    cultural expression has become the philosophical foundation for the
    larger 'free culture' movement".

[^101]: "The idea that the proprietary software social system ---the
    system that says you are not allowed to share or change software---
    is antisocial, that it is unethical, that it is simply wrong, may
    come as a surprise to some readers. But what else could we say about
    a system based on dividing the public and keeping users helpless?"
    (Stallman, 2010, p. 8), although Stallman further develops that idea
    throughout the whole chapter 2.

[^102]: "Copyleft" as a play on the word "copyright" and used to refer a
    copyright licensing scheme in which an author gives in some (but not
    all) rights under copyright law, was originally conceived by Richard
    Stallman when he created GPL License. Under copyleft, derived works
    may be produced provided they are released under the compatible
    copyleft scheme yet at the same time author still retains some of
    their rights (hence, the well known statement "Copyleft -- some
    rights reserved").

[^103]: Lawrence Lessig credits Stallman as primary source of
    inspiration to such an extent that he admits that all the ideas that
    he develops in his book *Free culture* had already outlined decades
    before by Stallman and as such, the book could be considered a
    derivative work of Stallman's (Lessig, 2004, p. xiv). This statement
    heavily demonstrates the aforementioned thesis that FSF has highly
    influenced FCM.

[^104]: Lessig has long been concerned by the ways in which code (in its
    two meanings: as understood in computer sciences and law) and more
    specifically, Internet, can be instruments for social control. He
    further develops this point of view in his first book: *Code*
    (Lessig, 1999)*.*

[^105]: Some of these new genres like remixes or mash-ups are described
    in Manovich (2007)'; Lessig (2008); Shiga (2007). The Internet's
    transformative potential is, hence, similar to the revolution
    introduced by George Eastman in 1888 when he released his cheap
    Kodak cameras and papers (Lessig, 2004, p. 33).

[^106]: Lessig provides numerous and notable examples from United
    States' recent history to justify his position, one of the most
    remarkable ones being the case of Walt Disney, whose first animated
    short that combined synchronized sound and image, *Steamboat
    Willie,* was in fact highly influenced by Buster Keaton's film
    Steamboat Bill, Jr. released earlier that year (Lessig, 2004, pp.
    21-23) and how Disney clearly adapted others' works in a number of
    times: Snow White (1937), Fantasia (1940), Pinocchio (1940), Dumbo
    (1941), Bambi (1942), Song of the South (1946), Cinderella (1950),
    Alice in Wonderland (1951), Robin Hood (1952), Peter Pan (1953),
    Lady and the Tramp (1955), Mulan (1998), Sleeping Beauty (1959), 101
    Dalmatians (1961), The Sword in the Stone (1963), The Jungle Book
    (1967), and Treasure Planet (2003) (Ibid., 23--24). This way of
    cultural production, which he names it as "traditional", has been
    accepted and recognized for years: not only Walt Disney's
    re-interpretation of fairy tales written by Brothers Grimm have not
    been prosecuted (Grimm's works became part of public domain after 30
    years of their publication) but have been celebrated and recognized
    as different, more child-friendly and sweeter, work and a valid
    creative process.

[^107]: Again, Lessig lucidly points out the example of Walt Disney's
    re-interpretation of fairy tales written by Brothers Grimm, which
    not only have not been prosecuted (Grimm's works became part of
    public domain after 30 years of their publication) but have been
    celebrated and recognized as different, more child-friendly and
    sweeter, work and a valid creative process (Lessig, 2004, p. 24).

[^108]: Lessig provides several examples of similar situations where
    private interests where notoriously threatened but no regulations
    supporting them were enacted, such as the loss of Kodak's emporium
    of printing copies after digital cameras became mainstream; the loss
    of rail roads importance in goods' transportation in favour of
    motorways or ships; or the weakening of «stickiness of television
    advertisement» after the invention of remote controls(Lessig, 2004,
    p. 127).

[^109]: In fact, Lessig dedicates most of his book to develop those two
    concepts in Part I (Piracy) and Part II (Property)

[^110]: Lessig (2004, pp. 277-282) explains how these rights are
    currently also threatened.

[^111]: According to him, this may be a no-return point ("A free culture
    has been our past, but it will only be our future if we change the
    path we are on right now." -Lessig 2004, xv), and in the afterword
    of his book, Lessig reflects on what is to be done in order to
    change this drift. After considering two groups of actions ("that
    which anyone can do now, and that which requires the help of
    lawmakers"), he advocates for a movement that has to start on the
    streets in order to reach the government (Lessig, 2004, p. 275).

[^112]: A studio made to 250 Free Culture initiatives in Sao Paulo
    during 2003 evidenced that there was no direct relationship between
    the notion of Free Culture used in each initiative and the
    theoretical approach made by Lessig or Stallman (Reia, 2010)*.*

[^113]: In addition to this final definition, which has seen two major
    improvements (current 1.1 version was locked on January 2015), they
    also have an editable version named "unstable" which is still open
    to anyone to edit and comment. In fact, at the time of writing this
    part of the document (February 2016) the latest amend to the
    definition was made on 4^th^ February 2016.

[^114]: This vision which is also shared by hackers and FLOSS proponents
    (Sullivan, 2011, p. 228).

[^115]: The first set of Creative Commons' licenses were released one
    year later after the foundation of the organization, in December
    2002. Since then, several modifications have been released, and
    currently the most up-to-date version, v. 4.0, dates from November
    25, 2013. For more information about the latest version, visit:
    [[https://blog.creativecommons.org/2013/11/25/ccs-next-generation-licenses-welcome-version-4-0/]](https://blog.creativecommons.org/2013/11/25/ccs-next-generation-licenses-welcome-version-4-0/)

[^116]: Although theoretically CC Licenses could be also applied to
    software and hardware, Creative Commons does not recommend the use
    of CC licenses for those uses, as "Unlike software-specific
    licenses, CC licenses do not contain specific terms about the
    distribution of source code, which is often important to ensuring
    the free reuse and modifiability of software. Many software licenses
    also address patent rights, which are important to software but may
    not be applicable to other copyrightable works. Additionally, our
    licenses are currently not compatible with the major software
    licenses, so it would be difficult to integrate CC-licensed work
    with other free software. Existing software licenses were designed
    specifically for use with software and offer a similar set of rights
    to the Creative Commons licenses."
    ([[https://creativecommons.org/faq/\#Can\_I\_apply\_a\_Creative\_Commons\_license\_to\_software.3F]](https://creativecommons.org/faq/#Can_I_apply_a_Creative_Commons_license_to_software.3F))

[^117]: This licence is often compared to "copyleft" free and open
    source software licences, as it does not add any restriction other
    than all new works based on a work under that licence will carry the
    same licence, so any derivatives will always be free, which means
    that will also allow commercial use.

[^118]: [[https://creativecommons.org/choose/]](https://creativecommons.org/choose/)

[^119]: To give an idea about the differences between those two texts,
    we can take the most basic license (CC BY) and compare the legal
    version
    ([[https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode]](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode))
    and the legal deed
    ([[https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/]](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)).
    Whereas the first has an extension of 2.500 words, the latter only
    has 187 and make use of the aforementioned logos.

[^120]: This standardised format has been named CC Rights Expression
    Language (CC REL). For more information on the
    [[https://wiki.creativecommons.org/wiki/CC\_REL]](https://wiki.creativecommons.org/wiki/CC_REL)

[^121]: [[http://search.creativecommons.org/]](http://search.creativecommons.org/)

[^122]: As Mayo Fuster states in the introduction to the Spanish edition
    of his book (Fuster Morell, 2015, p. 24), the relevance of *The
    Wealth of Networks* relies on the fact that, despite it may not be
    the first text on these matters, it was the first reference book
    that comprehensively explained what common-based peer production is,
    and at the same time, provided resources to interpret and understand
    its transforming potentialities. Last, but not least, the importance
    of this book goes beyond the fact that it played a crucial role in
    drawing attention about that phenomenon to the broader audience, as
    it also led by example by publishing its contents under Creative
    Commons' "Noncommercial Share Alike" licence and by keeping it free
    to download, not to mention that there have been some editions of
    this book that have been following a collaborative approach, which
    is yet another example of common-based peer production. The Spanish
    edition is an example of this infrequent approach and it is further
    explained in the Editor's introduction (Cabello & Alonso, 2015).

[^123]: "The change brought about by the networked information
    environment is deep. It is structural. It goes to the very
    foundations of how liberal markets and liberal democracies have
    coevolved for almost two centuries." (Ibid., 1)

[^124]: Benkler is specially concerned by the changes in social
    relationships relative to the roles of market and non-market
    sectors, but instead of providing a sociological approach (like the
    one provided by Manuel Castells1 centred in the construction of new
    organizational structures and hierarchies in the form of networks),
    he considers technical and economic characteristics of computer
    networks and information as the main drivers of such changes in
    social behaviours that lead towards a radical decentralization of
    production.

[^125]: It is important to note that, despite Benkler acknowledges
    having a liberal position regarding to freedom (Benkler, 2006, p.
    16), what he means by it is not the classical liberal notion of the
    absence of state coercion, but the modern liberal view of
    "autonomy": individuals' ability to achieve their goals without
    restraints or manipulations, voluntary or otherwise, by third
    parties (visit page 9 for more on this). Hence, Benkler's sympathy
    for the commons, an institutional framework in which individuals,
    not a collective, hold property rights. It does not matter for
    Benkler whether the collective is a private club, such as the
    participants of an open-source project or the subscribers to a
    particular information service or the state. What matters is how the
    commons facilitates "freedom of action" in comparison to how a
    system of private-property rights affords freedom (P. G. Klein,
    2009). This understanding of liberty, which originates with Kant and
    Rousseau, is central to Benkler's political economy.

[^126]: Despite Benkler's claims against deterministic approaches as
    being too limited (Benkler, 2006, pp. 16-18) and his statement that
    it is not networked information technology by itself, but the
    choices made as society, what may guarantee the improvements in
    innovation, freedom, and justice that he suggests throughout his
    book, his discourse may still be considered somewhat
    techno-deterministic and optimistic (visit Vaidhyanathan (2006) for
    a detailed point of view on this matter).

[^127]: By "nonpropietary" Benkler refers to the fact that does not rely
    on strong copyright agreements as the ones that are broadly used in
    what he calls industrial information economy (e.g.: traditional
    business model in publishing or music industries).

[^128]: Although Benkler admits that some people may in fact be
    motivated by long-term outcomes in form of money-oriented
    activities, like consulting or service contracts, the motivation of
    the majority is more altruistic. This idea was further developed by
    himself later on (Benkler, 2011) and is also shared by Pekka Himanen
    (2001/2002)*.*

[^129]: Debian is a GNU/Linux distribution which is known, amongst other
    things, for its social contract
    [[https://www.debian.org/social\_contract]](https://www.debian.org/social_contract)
    and its code of conduct
    [[https://www.debian.org/code\_of\_conduct]](https://www.debian.org/code_of_conduct)
    that any developer has to embrace in order to contribute to the
    project. Both documents have had several versions (as time of
    writing the latest versions date from April 26^th^, 2004 and April
    28^th^, 2014 respectively) and have been collaboratively written by
    members of the community.

[^130]: Benkler may argue that even such examples would still be
    considered as non-market, for the aforementioned reasons.

[^131]: For a more comprehensive explanation and examples visit Mayo
    Fuster's Ph.D. Theses (Fuster Morell, 2010).

[^132]: For more information on the motivations that bring people to
    participate in collaborative consumption networks visit Hamari,
    Sjöklint, and Ukkonen (2015). The differences between the so-called
    sharing economy and the commons will be further elaborated in pages
    115 and subsequent at the section 4.3 where we develop the
    limitations of a theoretical approach to urban commons and the risks
    it entails.

[^133]: Not in vain, Benkler perspective is that of the market/industry,
    which can make certain behaviours obsolete when compared to more
    efficient emerging ones.
